add setup guide for enabling data jobs monitoring for airflow (#25311)
DataDog/documentation: content/en/data_jobs/airflow.md

---
title: Enable Data Jobs Monitoring for Apache Airflow
is_beta: true
private: true
aliases:
    - /data_jobs/airflow/
    - data_jobs/airflow/

> further_reading:

Reviewer: As per https://github.com/DataDog/documentation/pull/25311/files#r1791826229

    - link: '/data_jobs'
      tag: 'Documentation'
      text: 'Data Jobs Monitoring'
---

{{< callout url="#" header="false" btn_hidden="true" >}}

>   Data Jobs Monitoring for Apache Airflow is in preview. To sign up for access, fill out [this form](https://www.datadoghq.com/private-beta/monitoring-for-data-and-data-pipelines/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Data Jobs Monitoring for Apache Airflow is in Preview. To sign up for access, fill out [this form](https://www.datadoghq.com/private-beta/monitoring-for-data-and-data-pipelines/).
```

Author: Hi @rtrieu , can you update the link to `https://www.datadoghq.com/private-beta/monitoring-for-data-and-data-pipelines/` instead?

Reviewer: Oops, yes, will update my suggestion.

[1]: https://github.com/apache/airflow/releases/tag/2.7.0
[2]: https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow-providers-openlineage/stable/index.html
[3]: https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow-providers-openlineage/stable/configurations-ref.html#configuration-openlineage
[4]: https://docs.datadoghq.com/account_management/api-app-keys/#api-keys
{{% /tab %}}

{{% tab "Amazon MWAA" %}}
## Requirements

* [Apache Airflow 2.8.3][1] or later is required.
* [apache-airflow-providers-openlineage 1.11.0][2] or later is required.

## Setup

Data Jobs Monitoring is supported for Apache Airflow deployment with [apache-airflow-providers-openlineage][2] installed.

To get started, follow the instructions below.

1. Install `openlineage` provider by adding the following into your `requirements.txt` file:
   
   ```text
   apache-airflow-providers-openlineage>=1.11.0
   ```

2. Configure `openlineage` provider. The simplest option is to set the following environment variables in your [Amazon MWAA start script][3]:
   
   ```shell
   #!/bin/sh
   
   export OPENLINEAGE_URL=<DD_DATA_OBSERVABILITY_INTAKE>
   export OPENLINEAGE_API_KEY=<DD_API_KEY>
   ```

>    **Important:**

Author: As this is part of the core setup, I will remove the **Important:** title at the top, this is consistent with the tab above.

[1]: https://github.com/apache/airflow/releases/tag/2.7.0
[2]: https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow-providers-openlineage/stable/index.html
[3]: https://docs.aws.amazon.com/mwaa/latest/userguide/using-startup-script.html
[4]: https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow-providers-openlineage/stable/configurations-ref.html#configuration-openlineage
[5]: https://docs.datadoghq.com/account_management/api-app-keys/#api-keys
[6]: https://docs.aws.amazon.com/mwaa/latest/userguide/mwaa-create-role.html

{{% /tab %}}
{{< /tabs >}}

## Validation

In Datadog, view the [Data Jobs Monitoring][2] page to see a list of your Airflow job runs after the setup. 

## Advanced Configuration

### Link your Spark jobs with Airflow task
You can troubleshoot Airflow tasks that run Spark jobs more efficiently by connecting the Spark job run info and telemetry with the respective Airflow task.
**Prerequisites**: your Spark jobs are currently monitored via [Data Jobs Monitoring][2] and are submitted via [SparkSubmitOperator][5]s from your Airflow jobs.

> To see the link between Airflow task and the the Spark application it submitted, following these steps:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To see the link between Airflow task and the the Spark application it submitted, follow these steps:
```

1. Configure Airflow to turn off lazy loading of Airflow plugins by setting [lazy_load_plugins config][3] to `False` in your `airflow.cfg` or exporting the following environment variable where your Airflow schedulers and Airflow workers run:
   
   ```shell
   export AIRFLOW__CORE__LAZY_LOAD_PLUGINS='False' 
   ```

2. Update your Airflow job's DAG file by adding the following Spark configurations to your [SparkSubmitOperator][5] where you submit your Spark Application:

   ```python
     SparkSubmitOperator(
       conf={
         "spark.openlineage.parentJobNamespace": "{{ macros.OpenLineageProviderPlugin.lineage_job_namespace() }}",
         "spark.openlineage.parentJobName": "{{ macros.OpenLineageProviderPlugin.lineage_job_name(task_instance) }}",
         "spark.openlineage.parentRunId": "{{ macros.OpenLineageProviderPlugin.lineage_run_id(task_instance) }}",
       },
     )
   ```

   See [Lineage job & run macros][4] for the definitions of referenced macros.

> 3. Once you have re-deployed your Airflow environment with the updated [lazy_load_plugins config][3] and the updated DAG file, and your Airflow DAG as been re-run, go to [Data Jobs Monitoring][2] page. You can then find your latest Airflow job run and see a SpanLink in the Airflow Job Run trace to the trace of the launched Spark Application. This makes it possible to debug issues in Airflow or in Spark all in once place.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Once you have re-deployed your Airflow environment with the updated [lazy_load_plugins config][3] and the updated DAG file, and your Airflow DAG as been re-run, go to [Data Jobs Monitoring][2] page. You can then find your latest Airflow job run and see a SpanLink in the Airflow Job Run trace to the trace of the launched Spark Application. This makes it possible to debug issues in Airflow or Spark all in once place.
```

## Requirements

* [Apache Airflow 2.8.3][1] or later is required.
* [apache-airflow-providers-openlineage 1.11.0][2] or later is required.

## Setup

Data Jobs Monitoring is supported for Apache Airflow deployment with [apache-airflow-providers-openlineage][2] installed.

To get started, follow the instructions below.

1. Install `openlineage` provider by adding the following into your `requirements.txt` file or wherever your Airflow depedencies are managed:
   
   ```text
   apache-airflow-providers-openlineage>=1.11.0
   ```

2. Configure `openlineage` provider. The simplest option is to set the following environment variables and make them available to pods where you run Airflow schedulers and Airflow workers:
   
   ```shell
   OPENLINEAGE_URL=<DD_DATA_OBSERVABILITY_INTAKE>
   OPENLINEAGE_API_KEY=<DD_API_KEY>
   ```

   **Important:**
   * install and configure `openlineage` provider for both Airflow schedulers and Airflow workers.
   * replace `<DD_DATA_OBSERVABILITY_INTAKE>` fully with `https://data-obs-intake.`{{< region-param key="dd_site" code="true" >}}.
   * replace `<DD_API_KEY>` fully with your valid [Datadog API key][4].
   
   **Optionally:**

>    * set `AIRFLOW__OPENLINEAGE__NAMESPACE` with a unique name for your Airflow instance to allow jobs from different Airflow instances logically separated.

Author: I don't think there is a consistent naming of this, I think you callout make sense here, it would be more rationale to call it deployment, that's what Astronomer call them just FYI.

   * set `OPENLINEAGE_CLIENT_LOGGING` to `DEBUG` for OpenLineage client and its child modules to log at `DEBUG` logging level. This can be useful in troubleshooting during the configuration of `openlineage` provider. 

   Check official documentation [configuration-openlineage][3] for other supported configurations of `openlineage` provider.

3. Trigger a update to your Airflow pods and wait for them to finish.

[1]: https://github.com/apache/airflow/releases/tag/2.7.0
[2]: https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow-providers-openlineage/stable/index.html
[3]: https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow-providers-openlineage/stable/configurations-ref.html#configuration-openlineage
[4]: https://docs.datadoghq.com/account_management/api-app-keys/#api-keys
{{% /tab %}}

> {{% tab "Amazon MWAA" %}}

Author: Thank you

   ```

2. Configure `openlineage` provider. The simplest option is to set the following environment variables in your [Amazon MWAA start script][3]:
   
   ```shell
   #!/bin/sh
   
   export OPENLINEAGE_URL=<DD_DATA_OBSERVABILITY_INTAKE>
   export OPENLINEAGE_API_KEY=<DD_API_KEY>
   ```

   **Important:**
   * replace `<DD_DATA_OBSERVABILITY_INTAKE>` fully with `https://data-obs-intake.`{{< region-param key="dd_site" code="true" >}}.
   * replace `<DD_API_KEY>` fully with your valid [Datadog API key][5].

   **Optionally:**
   * set `AIRFLOW__OPENLINEAGE__NAMESPACE` with a unique name for your Airflow instance to allow jobs from different Airflow instances logically separated.
   * set `OPENLINEAGE_CLIENT_LOGGING` to `DEBUG` for OpenLineage client and its child modules to log at `DEBUG` logging level. This can be useful in troubleshooting during the configuration of `openlineage` provider. 

   Check official documentation [configuration-openlineage][4] for other supported configurations of `openlineage` provider.

3. Deploy your updated `requirements.txt` and [Amazon MWAA start script][3] to your Amazon S3 folder configured for your Amazon MWAA Environment.

> 4. Ensure your Execution role configured for your Amazon MWAA Environment has the right permissions to the `requirements.txt` and [Amazon MWAA start script][3]. This is required if you are managing your own Execution role and it's the first time you are adding those supporting files. See official guide [Amazon MWAA execution role][6] for details if needed.

Author: A restart the components is needed (airflow scheduler and worker)

[1]: https://github.com/apache/airflow/releases/tag/2.7.0
[2]: https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow-providers-openlineage/stable/index.html
[3]: https://docs.aws.amazon.com/mwaa/latest/userguide/using-startup-script.html
[4]: https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow-providers-openlineage/stable/configurations-ref.html#configuration-openlineage
[5]: https://docs.datadoghq.com/account_management/api-app-keys/#api-keys
[6]: https://docs.aws.amazon.com/mwaa/latest/userguide/mwaa-create-role.html

{{% /tab %}}
{{< /tabs >}}

## Validation

In Datadog, view the [Data Jobs Monitoring][2] page to see a list of your Airflow job runs after the setup. 

## Advanced Configuration

### Link your Spark jobs with Airflow task

**Prerequisites**: your Spark jobs are currently monitored via [Data Jobs Monitoring][2] and are submitted via [SparkSubmitOperator][5]s from your Airflow jobs.

> To allow your Airflow job linked to the Spark application it submitted, following the steps below:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To see the link between Airflow task and the the Spark application it submitted, following these steps:
```

> 1. Configure your Airflow to turn off lazily loading Airflow plugins by setting [lazy_load_plugins config][3] to `False` in your `airflow.cfg` or exporting the following environment variable where your Airflow schedulers and Airflow workers run:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Configure Airflow to turn off lazy loading of Airflow plugins by setting [lazy_load_plugins config][3] to `False` in your `airflow.cfg` or exporting the following environment variable where your Airflow schedulers and Airflow workers run:
```

   
   ```shell
   export AIRFLOW__CORE__LAZY_LOAD_PLUGINS='False' 
   ```

2. Update your Airflow job's DAG file by adding the following Spark configurations to your [SparkSubmitOperator][5] where you submit your Spark Application:

   ```python
     SparkSubmitOperator(
       conf={
         "spark.openlineage.parentJobNamespace": "{{ macros.OpenLineageProviderPlugin.lineage_job_namespace() }}",
         "spark.openlineage.parentJobName": "{{ macros.OpenLineageProviderPlugin.lineage_job_name(task_instance) }}",
         "spark.openlineage.parentRunId": "{{ macros.OpenLineageProviderPlugin.lineage_run_id(task_instance) }}",
       },
     )
   ```

>    See [Lineage job & run macros][4] for definition of referenced macros.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   See [Lineage job & run macros][4] for the definitions of referenced macros.
```

> 3. Once you have your Airflow environment re-deployed with the updated [lazy_load_plugins config][3] and the updated DAG file, in the next run of your Airflow DAG, go to [Data Jobs Monitoring][2] page, find your latest Airflow job run, see a SpanLink is now linked from the Airflow Job Run trace to the trace of the launched Spark Application, and vice versa.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. Once you have re-deployed your Airflow environment with the updated [lazy_load_plugins config][3] and the updated DAG file, and your Airflow DAG as been re-run, go to [Data Jobs Monitoring][2] page. You can then find your latest Airflow job run and see a SpanLink in the Airflow Job Run trace to the trace of the launched Spark Application. This makes it possible to debug issues in Airflow or in Spark all in once place.
```

---
title: Enable Data Jobs Monitoring for Apache Airflow
is_beta: true
private: true
aliases:
    - /data_jobs/airflow/
    - data_jobs/airflow/
further_reading:
    - link: 'https://www.datadoghq.com/blog/data-jobs-monitoring/'
      tag: 'blog'
      text: 'Troubleshoot and optimize data processing workloads with Data Jobs Monitoring'
    - link: 'https://www.datadoghq.com/blog/data-observability-monitoring'
      tag: 'blog'
      text: 'Observing the data lifecycle with Datadog'
    - link: '/data_jobs'
      tag: 'Documentation'
      text: 'Data Jobs Monitoring'
---

> {{< callout url="<https://www.datadoghq.com/private-beta/monitoring-for-data-and-data-pipelines/>" d_target="#signupModal" btn_hidden="false" header="Request access to the Preview!" >}}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{{< callout url="<https://www.datadoghq.com/private-beta/monitoring-for-data-and-data-pipelines/" d_target="#signupModal" btn_hidden="false" header="Request access to the Preview!" >}}
```

---
title: Enable Data Jobs Monitoring for Apache Airflow
is_beta: true
private: true
aliases:
    - /data_jobs/airflow/
    - data_jobs/airflow/
further_reading:
    - link: '/data_jobs'
      tag: 'Documentation'
      text: 'Data Jobs Monitoring'
---

{{< callout url="#" header="false" btn_hidden="true" >}}
  Data Jobs Monitoring for Apache Airflow is in preview.
{{< /callout >}}

[Data Jobs Monitoring][1] gives visibility into the performance and reliability of workflows run by Apache Airflow DAGs.

{{< tabs >}}
{{% tab "Astronomer" %}}

<div class="alert alert-warning">
For Astronomer customers using Astro, the following setup may affect the lineage feature offered by Astro. see <a href=https://www.astronomer.io/docs/learn/airflow-openlineage#lineage-on-astro>this</a> for context.
</div>

## Requirements

* [Apache Airflow 2.8.0][1] or later is required.
* [apache-airflow-providers-openlineage][2] 1.12.0 or later is required.

## Setup

Data Jobs Monitoring is supported for Apache Airflow deployment with [apache-airflow-providers-openlineage][2] installed.

To get started, follow the instructions below.

> 1. Ariflow provider `openlineage` is already installed in [Astro Runtimes][3]. Customize the provider version by adding the following to your `requirements.txt` file into your [Astro project][4].

Reviewer 3: Should we directly use the version installed by astronomer ? and not show how to customize it ?

   
   ```text

>    apache-airflow-providers-openlineage==<AIRLOW_OPENLINEAGE_PROVIDER_VERSION>

Reviewer 4: typo: should be AIRFLOW

   
   ```shell
   OPENLINEAGE_URL=https://data-obs-intake.{{< region-param key="dd_site" code="true" >}}
   OPENLINEAGE_ENDPOINT=api/v1/lineage
   OPENLINEAGE_API_KEY=<DD_API_KEY>
   ```

   See [Astronomer official guide][5] for managing environment variables for a Deployment, and check official documentation [configuration-openlineage][6] for other supported configurations of `openlineage` provider.

   **Important:**
   * replace `<DD_API_KEY>` fully with your valid [Datadog API key][7].

3. Trigger a update to your Deployment and wait for it to finish.

[1]: https://github.com/apache/airflow/releases/tag/2.8.0
[2]: https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow-providers-openlineage/stable/index.html
[3]: https://www.astronomer.io/docs/astro/runtime-provider-reference
[4]: https://www.astronomer.io/docs/astro/cli/develop-project
[5]: https://www.astronomer.io/docs/astro/manage-env-vars#using-the-astro-ui
[6]: https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow-providers-openlineage/stable/configurations-ref.html#configuration-openlineage
[7]: https://docs.datadoghq.com/account_management/api-app-keys/#api-keys

{{% /tab %}}

> {{% tab "Kubernetes" %}}

Reviewer 3: It is only for K8s, or does it also work for all self hosted installations ?

Author: this will work for all self-hosted installations (with some slight wording change in the tab). We can make that call out by change the tab name to `Self-hosted` if that's preferred. @warrierr , what do you think?

## Requirements

* [Apache Airflow 2.8.3][1] or later is required.
* [apache-airflow-providers-openlineage 1.11.0][2] or later is required.

## Setup

Data Jobs Monitoring is supported for Apache Airflow deployment with [apache-airflow-providers-openlineage][2] installed.

To get started, follow the instructions below.

1. Install `openlineage` provider by adding the following into your `requirements.txt` file or wherever your Airflow depedencies is managed:
   
   ```text
   apache-airflow-providers-openlineage>=1.11.0
   ```

2. Configure `openlineage` provider. The simplest option is to set the following environment variables and make them available to pods where you run Airflow schedulers and Airflow workers:
   
   ```shell

>    OPENLINEAGE_URL=https://data-obs-intake.{{< region-param key="dd_site" code="true" >}}

Reviewer 3: It is not being substituted with the right value in the preview (showing
`<code class="js-region-param region-param" data-region-param="dd_site">`)

>    OPENLINEAGE_ENDPOINT=api/v1/lineage

Reviewer 3: Is it possible to remove this variable ? (since it is the default endpoint used by openlineage)

[1]: https://github.com/apache/airflow/releases/tag/2.7.0
[2]: https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow-providers-openlineage/stable/index.html
[3]: https://docs.aws.amazon.com/mwaa/latest/userguide/using-startup-script.html
[4]: https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow-providers-openlineage/stable/configurations-ref.html#configuration-openlineage
[5]: https://docs.datadoghq.com/account_management/api-app-keys/#api-keys
[6]: https://docs.aws.amazon.com/mwaa/latest/userguide/mwaa-create-role.html

{{% /tab %}}
{{< /tabs >}}

## Validation

In Datadog, view the [Data Jobs Monitoring][2] page to see a list of all your Airflow jobs.

## Advanced Configuration

### Link your Spark jobs with Airflow task
To allow your Airflow job linked to the the Spark application it submitted, following the following steps:

1. Configure your Airflow to turn off lazily loading Airflow plugins by setting [lazy_load_plugins config][3] to `False` in your `airflow.cfg` or exporting the following environment variable where your Airflow schedulers and Airflow workers run:
   
   ```shell

>    export AIRFLOW__CORE__LAZY_LOAD_PLUGINS='False' 

Reviewer 3: Is the `LAZY_LOAD_PLUGINS` only needed for the macros, or also for the regular openlineage capabilities ?

Author: it's just for the macros.
